---
layout: ../../../../layouts/Layout.astro
title: COMP3231 - Week 5 Tutorial
---

1. Consider a file currently consisting of 100 records of 400 bytes. The filesystem uses fixed blocking, i.e. one 400 byte record is stored per 512 byte block. Assume that the file control block (and the index block, in the case of indexed allocation) is already in memory. Calculate how many disk I/O operations are required for contiguous, linked, and indexed (single-level) allocation strategies, if, for one record, the following conditions hold. In the contiguous-allocation case, assume that there is no room to grow at the beginning, but there is room to grow at the end of the file. Assume that the record information to be added is stored in memory.
    * The record is added at the beginning.
        1. contiguous: (100 read + 100 write [from shifting the 100 blocks]) + 1 write = 201
        2. linked: 1 write
        3. indexed: 1 write
    * The record is added in the middle.
        1. contiguous: (50 read + 50 write [from shifting the 50 blocks]) + 1 write = 101
        2. linked: 50 reads + 2 writes = 52
        3. indexed: 1 write
    * The record is added at the end.
        1. contiguous: 1 write
        2. linked: 100 reads + 1 write = 101
        3. indexed: 1 write
    * The record is removed from the beginning.
        1. contiguous: 0 read + 0 write (can just increment what the directory is pointing at)
        2. linked: 
        3. indexed: 0. Just update inode
    * The record is removed from the middle.
        1. contiguous: still does shifting
        2. linked: 51 reads + 1 write
        3. indexed: 0. Just update inode
    * The record is removed from the end.
        1. contiguous: just update length of the FCB
        2. linked: traverse whole list. 100 reads + 1 write
        3. indexed: 0. Just update inode

---

2. In the previous example, only 400 bytes is stored in each 512 byte block. Is this wasted space due to internal or external fragmentation?

Internal fragmentation.

---

3. Old versions of UNIX allowed you to write to directories. Newer ones do not even allow the superuser to write to them? Why? Note that many unices allow you read directories.

---

4. Given a file which varies in size from 4KiB to 4MiB, which of the three allocation schemes (contiguous, linked-list, or i-node based) would be suitable to store such a file? If the file is access randomly, how would that influence the suitability of the three schemes?

* Continuous: We have to allocate the maximum size, which is 4MiB. Causes waste of space for smaller files / internal fragmentation. But great for random access
* Linked-list: Adequate. Could grow to accomodate. Not good for random access.
* Inodes: Best choice overall.

---

5. Why is there VFS Layer in Unix?

Because the OS may use different kinds of FS. We need an abstraction layer for the OS to work with these different FS using a centralised interface.

Applications just call standard system calls like open(), read(), write() without needing to know the underlying filesystem

---

6. How does choice of block size affect file system performance. You should consider both sequential and random access.

---

7. Is the open() system call in UNIX essential? What would be the consequence of not having it?

Not really. open() returns a file descriptor. Without it, reads and writes need to be suppliad with the full path name of the file. In theory would still work,
but slower.

---

8. Some operating system provide a rename system call to give a file a new name. What would be different compared to the approach of simply copying the file to a new name and then deleting the original file?

Copying a massive file means reading every block and writing it again. Very expensive.

---

9. In both UNIX and Windows, random file access is performed by having a special system call that moves the current position in the file so the subsequent read or write is performed from the new position. What would be the consequence of not having such a call. How could random access be supported by alternative means?

